Spatial data analysis with R: wrangling, visualization and econometric models is a [complete open course](https://github.com/jaime-pru/Analisis-de-datos-espaciales) in Spanish for the analysis of spatial information in R software. The course is aimed at Spanish-speaking economics undergraduate students interested in developing technical skills for the quantitative analysis required by regional sciences and the spatial approach of economics.

Its objective is to guide the reader, from a fundamentally practical approach, in the knowledge and handling of techniques for the exploration, analysis and modeling of spatial information through the use of R [@RSoftware] and RStudio, a computer program and programming language focused on statistical analysis. and information visualization and an integrated development environment (IDE), respectively.

The course appears in the form of an electronic book and is structured in five chapters of gradual learning. In chapter 1, the basic elements of R and RStudio are presented through the use of the exploratory data analysis approach, that is, the student is fully introduced to the use of the software to propose and solve questions related to the data structure through various information visualization and manipulation tools.

Chapter 2 shows how to create various types of choropleth maps and the enormous flexibility of style customization that R has for this purpose. Chapter 3 presents the tools to carry out an exploratory analysis of spatial data where the reader will find a way to define the interrelationships that occur in space through the construction of spatial weight matrices and will learn about spatial autocorrelation and its implications in the analysis of information. Meanwhile, in chapter 4, a very synthetic review of simple regression models is presented, emphasizing the problem of autocorrelation that could occur when estimating a linear model with spatial data. Finally, in chapter 5, some of the different spatial econometric modeling alternatives available in R are shown.

All the exercises that are presented in the course are based on a database about information on the situation of the COVID19 pandemic between March and September 2020 in the Metropolitan Area of Valle de México, the largest metropolitan area in Mexico, integrated by 76 local administrative units or municipalities and that has more than 21 million inhabitants. In addition, the database used provides information on the economic structure at the municipal level and a set of variables of a sociodemographic characteristics coming from the population census.
